Recently, I read somewhere, something very
interesting, about these smartphones.
That “People are prisoners of their phones…”
And, probably, that is why, “They are calling
it CELL Phones”.
Too many people have criticised it, too many
have called it a curse, a curse of new technology,
but is there something?
Some thing good that we can learn, as lessons
from these?
Is there anything at all?
Shall we see?!
Namaste!
Smart phones!
Once upon a time, they were called “hand
phones” but now they have become “smart”.
Are there any life-lessons at all, that we
can glean from observing this ubiquitous device?
That’s what we are going to see today.
We will start with the launch of the smartphone-generation.
Steve Jobs came on to the stage, and mocked
at the other phones that had plasticky keyboards.
Always-on keyboards.
Keyboards that stayed on display even when
they were not really needed.
Because, they were not “on screen”.
They were made of plastic and metal, and were
actually placed OUTSIDE the screen.
He mocked at them.
And, he said, “Here is a phone, for the
first time, that is all screen!
Metal, glass, … you are taken IN”.
If you want to focus on one-thing and one-thing-alone
at any point of time, for the first time,
there was a product!
While thinking about this, about the epochal
moment that it represented, I am reminded
of the advice we all get, about not doing
multiple projects..
About the wisdom in choosing one project.
For that is when our intent in reaching the
Benchmark of Success is actually much easier.
One thing.
Only one thing.
Deeply focus on that.
So, it makes clear sense.
There is limited energy.
If you are going to apportion it among multiple
baskets, I don’t know if you’ll ever be
able to fill one of those baskets.
But.., if you take the time to choose, and
become “all-screen” on that, just like
that phone…!
The next thing is about battery discharge..
Hopefully we don’t allow the phone to drain
this badly..!
For, this screen comes up only when the phone
battery has been drained all the way down
to zero!
But, almost every other day, some of us, every
day, we charge our phone!
We so regularly and consistently, in a disciplined
and almost religious manner, recharge our
phones!
Many have started asking, do we recharge our
body, mind, and soul along similar lines?
How do you recharge?
You do something that is completely removed..
Some of us may just sit at our desk, doing
nothing!
And, that is doing something!
That is recharging!
Some of us may just go out, embrace nature.
Explore.
Have an adventure!
Some of us may stay indoors!
Do yoga.
Do meditation.
Do relaxation.
Do stretching.
But, something that takes you away..
You keep fiddling all the time with your phone..
And then, it says, “Hey, give me a break..”
And then, it communes with the energy-giving
environment that it needs.
Similarly, our body, our mind, our soul, needs
that commune that replenishes our energy,
so that we can go back into work.
And, as I talk about this, a phrase that I
hear ominously too often, “Moonlighting”
comes up for discussion.
Moonlighting is supposed to be the “second
gig” or the “side job” that you do.
One is my work.
The other is my passion.
We hear them say.
But, hey, why can’t we do our job passionately?
See, if your battery needs recharging, so
does your body, your mind, your soul.
And, you cannot recharge it by starting another
application on your phone…
Can you?
And, so, similarly, to recharge your body
and mind, can you start another gig for it??
One of the important bits of advice they give,
to conserve battery, is “Close other open
applications.
Preserve energy.
Save it from being drained away”.
So, why moonlight?
Why can’t you show that passion in your
main job?!
Originally, when the smartphone was announced
to the world, Steve Jobs was not interested
in an App Store.
Unbeknownst to him, some of his aides, realising
the importance of having one to come up with
interesting and innovative ideas, to expand
and enhance the power of the Smartphone, worked
on it without his knowledge, and surprised
him with it!
Thanks to that, we are able to see millions
and millions of Apps.
It is not the phone really, that is amazing.
It is the extra abilities and capabilities
that the phone now has, because of the Apps
that it has now installed on itself over time.
When I see this, I am reminded of that famous
debate.
They say “Nature versus Nurture”..
If you have reached some place in life, would
you credit your parents, your genetics, for
it?
Or, would you say, it is the people I encountered,
it is the adventures I had, it is the risk
I took..?”
If you haven’t reached somewhere, are you
going to blame your heritage, your parents,
your genetics?
Or, are you going to say, “I didn’t learn
things right..
I didn’t pick the right risks..”
Is it nature or is it nurture?
Is the PHONE the reason for it being special?
Or, are the Apps that run on it, that make
it special?
What are the skills you have learned along
the way?
What have you accrued?
Is the phone taken out of the fresh packaging
going to remain AS IT IS?
Or, are you going to install some App to enhance
its ability?
Nature.. versus Nurture..!
Did you know!?
There is a phone that looks like this!
I was completely taken aback!
“Light” is the name of this phone..
And, thankfully, it has gone out of business.
It is focusing on something else now.
It is “focusing” on something else now..!
This phone has sixteen cameras!
Sixteen cameras!
It can purportedly give DSLR-quality images
when photos are shot using it.
But, sixteen cameras!
No smartphone will really want to cram sixteen
cameras into its body!
Sleek body..
Right?
That is why, now, with the launch of every
new operating system and phone, both in the
Android world and in the iOS Apple world,
we are hearing about a new term.. a very interesting
new term, called Computational Photography.
And, what is it all about, actually?
The camera is still the same..
The lenses, still more or less the same.
But, the stuff we do with the light that is
coming in?
The stuff we DO!?
That is the magic!
We do edge detection!
We do facial landmarking!
We perform image fusion!
Highlighting.
Local tone mapping.
True tone skin.
Fusion of layers.
Auto-white balance, exposure correction, everything
happens on the raw input, using software magic!
The light is the same, the lenses are probably
are the same, but what we can do now with
extra image processors, AFTER receiving the
light.. that is what is making our photographs
amazing.. claim both Google and Apple!
This concept… the failure of the sixteen-camera
monster called Light, and the latest successes
of the smartphones of today featuring computational
photography, when we compare these two, I
am reminded of that age-old quote.
Life — ten percent of that is made up of
what happens to you.
But, a full ninety percent is made up of what
you DO with it.
The reaction.
Everybody gets light.
But, the cooking I do, the creating I do,
the enhancement I do, with the light I receive?!
Everybody gets a grain of sand.
But, only an oyster can turn it into a beautiful
pearl.
So, what are YOU going to do with what life
has DEALT to you?
Are you going to ask for more and wait for
more?
Or, are you going to perform whatever magic
you can with whatever you have in your hands?
Think about it!
Sensors!
If you tear a smartphone apart, there are
probably only TWO things you will see more
and more of.
Battery.
Sensors.
Larger and larger battery — not too large
though, for the sleekness of the phone will
be lost.
And, a lot of sensors.
You have a GPS.
A barometer.
A temperature sensor.
A light sensor.
Position sensors, accelerometers, movement
sensors, magnetometers, all kinds of sensors.
Guess why??
We can’t make the battery larger beyond
a point!
What is this person doing?
What am I actually using the phone now for?
Am I holding it, am I reading something, is
it face down, is it moving in a vehicle, where
can I save time, where can I optimise it,
where can I protect the battery from being
drained, .. To ask questions such as these,
you need to know about YOURSELF..
The cellphone wants to know about itself..
Are notifications ON or OFF?
Is our man sleeping or awake?
Is he having it on his hand, or does the phone
lie somewhere on a table, unattended?
Is he tapping something furiously, or is he
consuming by just looking at the screen?
Can I open my camera a little to see if the
guy is actually looking at me, or looking
elsewhere?!
So many beautiful questions, it is asking,
for what?
To know about the SELF.
Why?
To save the battery.
To optimise it..
Whatever limited potential it has, it wants
to use it at the right time, in the right
direction, to help us to the max.
Lesson for us also!
I heard there is a Greek saying.
Up atop the Parthenon, the Temple of Delhi,
there are three important messages that greet
visitors.
The first one is “Gnothi Seauton!”
Know Thyself.
You have to learn about yourself, your limitations,
your strengths, your weaknesses, what are
the things that are threatening you, what
opportunities are available for you, that
SWOT analysis..
If you do that, you don’t need to enlarge
the battery, you just have to use it optimally.
You can do amazing stuff!
Your brain doesn’t need to be bigger.
It just needs to be focused.
And, for that, Gnothi Seauton!
Do you even know?
What makes you angry, what makes you happy?
Do you know what your worst distractions,
what your weaknesses are?
Do you know what stokes your passion?
What allows you to go that extra mile?
If you know that, .. success will follow automatically!
Finally, every cellphone is retired.
And, when you retire your phone, what do you
do?
You don’t just throw that phone away, get
another phone.
Do you?
Of course not!
What do you do?
You put it up into a cloud.
Could be iCloud, could be Google Cloud..
You make a backup of it.
Once that is done, you reinstall the important
bits on to the new phone, when the next generation
phone comes along.
The moment the new phone is in hand, an image
of the old one comes on to the next one.
When I think about this, I am reminded of
a famous quote by Stephen Covey.
A beautiful life principle.
He said, “Yes,…
To live.
You have to live.
Don’t just exist.
And, yes, you have to love!
Do everything with love, you have to shower
unconditional love on the people around you.
To Live.
To Love.
Of course you have to laugh!
Don’t take life too seriously!
Why so serious?!
You have to laugh.
And, along the way, while living, while loving,
while laughing, you have to make some mistakes
so you can learn.
But, is all this enough?
What are all these for?
Living, Loving, Laughing, Learning…
What for?
Don’t forget that.
That end goal is important.
What is that end goal?
To leave a legacy!
A positive impact as proof of your existence.
Probably a book.
Probably a happy child.
Probably a new process, a new system, probably
a new concept, probably a new product, probably
an approach, a methodology, probably even
a lesson on HOW NOT TO LIVE A LIFE, whatever!
But, something should leave your body and
go up to that hive mind, … a space where
everybody can perceive and understand, and
it should be reinstalled in the operating
systems of the people who come after you.
That is Leaving A Legacy.
Just like that smartphone.
I really pity that phone which is just thrown
away and a new phone is bought and is started
to be used.
Something has to hop over!
Wasn’t there a single important message?
A single important photograph?
Similarly, if a life has been lived and passed
away, is that it?
Or, is there a lesson to be learned?
Something to be imbibed?
Think about it!
Today’s closing thought, … I was thinking,
until today, that you have to close unnecessary
Apps to conserve battery power.
Somebody had asked Tim Cook himself about
it.
“Do you quit your iOS multitasking Apps
frequently and is this necessary for battery
life?”
Craig Federighi, Tim’s second-in-command,
responded thus.
“No and No!
You don’t need to do that!
We have done a LOT OF research, about how
to conserve battery life!
It doesn’t mean you should only have one
application open.
You can have other Apps open too, in the background.
We optimise it.
Don’t worry!”
On this very same day, meanwhile, my team’s
daily-read instalment from a Robin Sharma
book featured this!
“Never forget that
time spent enriching your non-work hours is
never a waste.”
We saw about the battery discharge, we discussed
Moonlighting, and called it “criminal”.
But, Robin here says you have to enrich your
non-working hours.
“It makes you tremendously efficient during
your working hours.
Our biggest ideas often come during our most
relaxed times.”
A colleague, after reading this, shared his
own experience about it too.
“Whenever I am on to resolving a difficult
issue in any project I couldn’t even concentrate
on it after a while and the bug will all appear
to be mysterious…
I take a random chit-chat with my teammates
regarding any incident recently happened to
them or us and refresh my mind or our minds,
if we were trying to fix together and then
the moment we have a refreshed look at the
same bug, our mind’s neuron connection will
fire a little differently than before and
thus possibly increase the chance of fixing
the issue more easily..
Have fixed them too…!”
So, enrichment is important.
Have a side-hobby!
Not a money-making gig, but a side-hobby.
At least tangentially relevant to what you
are doing today!
That is very important!
That is the finer point that I wanted to share
with you in the closing thought.
So, YES, moderation
is important.
Everything in moderation,… including moderation
itself!
Words to live by… sometimes!
Thank you, I will meet you again next week!